1
INTRODUCTION: TRA... 
T
ake a look at Maps 1 and 2. Map 1 was made in 
1154 CE by the Arab geographer Al-Idrisi. The 
section reproduced here is a detail of the Indian 
subcontinent from his larger map of the world. Map 2 
was made in the 1720s by a French cartographer. The 
two maps are quite different even though they are of the 
same area. In al-Idrisi’s map, south India is where we 
island at the top. Place-names are marked in Arabic, 
Cartographer 
A person who 
makes maps.
INTRODUCTION: TRACING CHANGES 
THROUGH A THOUSAND YEARS
Map 1 
A section of the world 
map drawn by the 
geographer al-Idrisi 
in the twelfth century 
showing the Indian 
subcontinent from 
land to sea.


2
and there are some well-known names like Kanauj 
in Uttar Pradesh (spelt in the map as Qanauj). Map 2 
was made nearly 600 years after Map 1, during this 
period, information about the subcontinent had 
changed considerably. This map seems more familiar to 
us and the coastal areas in particular are surprisingly 
detailed. This map was used by European sailors and 
merchants on their voyages. 
Look at the areas in the interior of the subcontinent 
on Map 2. Are they as detailed as those on the coast? 
Follow the course of the River Ganga and see how it is 
shown. Why do you think there is a difference in the level 
of detail and accuracy between the coastal and inland 
areas in this map?
Map 2 
The subcontinent, from 
the early-eighteenth- 
century Atlas Nouveau 
of Guillaume de l’Isle. 
?


3
INTRODUCTION: TRA... 
Equally important is the fact that the science 
of cartography differed in the two periods. When 
historians read documents, maps and texts from the 
past, they have to be sensitive to the different historical 
backgrounds – the 
 – in which information 
about the past was produced.
New and Old Terminologies
If the context in which information is produced 
changes with time, what about language and 
meanings? Historical records exist in a variety of 
languages which have changed considerably over 
the years. Medieval Persian, for example, is different 
from modern Persian. The difference is not just with 
regard to grammar and vocabulary; the meanings of 
words also change over time. 
Take the term “Hindustan”, for example. Today we 
understand it as “India”, the modern 
. 
When the term was used in the thirteenth century by 
meant the areas of Punjab, Haryana and the lands 
between the Ganga and Yamuna. He used the term 
in a political sense for lands that were a part of the 
the term never included south India. By contrast, in 
the early sixteenth century, Babur used Hindustan 
to describe the geography, the fauna and the culture 
of the inhabitants of the subcontinent. As we will see 
later in the chapter, this was somewhat similar to the 
way the fourteenth-century poet Amir Khusrau used 
the word “Hind”. While the idea of a geographical 
and cultural entity like “India” did exist, the term 
“Hindustan” did not carry the political and national 
meanings which we associate with it today. 
Historians today have to be careful about the terms 
they use because they meant different things in the 
past. Take, for example, a simple term like “foreigner”. 
It is used today to mean someone who is not an Indian. 
Can you think of 
any other words 
whose meanings 
change in 
different contexts? 
?


4
In the medieval period, a “foreigner” was any stranger 
who appeared say in a given village, someone who was 
not a part of that society or culture. (In Hindi the term 
 might be used to describe such a person and 
in Persian, 
.) A city-dweller, therefore, might 
have regarded a forest-dweller as a “foreigner”, but two 
peasants living in the same village were not foreigners 
to each other, even though they may have had different 
religious or caste backgrounds.
Historians and their Sources
Historians use different types of sources to learn about 
the past depending upon the period of their study 
example, you read about rulers of the Gupta dynasty 
and Harshavardhana. In this book we will read about 
the following thousand years, from roughly 700 to 1750. 
You will notice some continuity in the sources used 
by historians for the study of this period. They still 
rely on coins, inscriptions, architecture and textual 
records for information. But there is also considerable 
discontinuity. The number and variety of textual records 
increased dramatically during this period. They slowly 
displaced other types of available information. Through 
this period, paper gradually became cheaper and more 
The value of paper
Compare the following: 
(1) In the middle of the thirteenth century a scholar 
wanted to copy a book. But he did not have enough 
paper. So he washed the writing off a manuscript he 
did not want, dried the paper and used it. 
(2) A century later, if you bought some food in the 
market you could be lucky and have the shopkeeper 
wrap it for you in some paper.
When was paper more expensive and easily available 
– in the thirteenth or the fourteenth century?
?


5
INTRODUCTION: TRA... 
widely available. People used it to write holy texts, 
chronicles of rulers, letters and teachings of saints, 
petitions and judicial records, and for registers of 
accounts and taxes. Manuscripts were collected by 
wealthy people, rulers, monasteries and temples. They 
were placed in libraries and archives. These manuscripts 
and documents provide a lot of detailed information to 
There was no printing press in those days so scribes 
copied manuscripts by hand. If you have ever copied a 
friend’s homework you would know that this is not a 
friend’s handwriting and are forced to guess what is 
differences in your copy of your friend’s work. 
Manuscript copying is somewhat similar. As scribes 
copied manuscripts, they also introduced small changes 
 – a word here, a sentence there. These small differences 
grew over centuries of copying until manuscripts of the 
Archive
A place where 
documents and 
manuscripts are 
stored. Today all 
national and state 
governments have 
archives where 
they keep all their 
and transactions.
Fig. 1
A painting of a scribe 
making a copy of 
a manuscript. This 
painting is only 
10.5 cm by 7.1 cm 
in size. Because of 
its size it is called a 
miniature. Miniature 
paintings were 
sometimes used to 
illustrate the texts of 
manuscripts. They 
were so beautiful that 
later collectors often 
took the manuscripts 
apart and sold just 
the miniatures. 


6
same text became substantially different from one 
another. This is a serious problem because we rarely 
are totally dependent upon the copies made by later 
scribes. As a result, historians have to read different 
manuscript versions of the same text to guess what 
the author had originally written. 
On occasion authors revised their chronicles at 
different times. The fourteenth-century chronicler 
and another version two years later. The two differ 
from each other but historians did not know about 
 
It remained lost in large library collections. 
New Social and Political Groups
The study of the thousand years between 700 and 1750 
is a huge challenge to historians largely because of the 
scale and variety of developments that occurred over 
the period. At different moments in this period, new 
technologies made their appearance – like the Persian 
Fig. 2  
Different kinds of 
handwriting could 
make the reading of 
Persian and Arabic 
nastaliq 
style (on the left) is 
cursive and easy to 
read, the shikaste (on 
the right) is denser 


7
INTRODUCTION: TRA... 
wheel in irrigation, the spinning wheel in weaving, and 
in the subcontinent – potatoes, corn, chillies, tea and 
coffee. Remember that all these innovations – new 
technologies and crops – came along with people, who 
brought other ideas with them as well. As a result, this 
was a period of economic, political, social and cultural 
changes. You will learn about some of these changes 
in Chapter 5. 
This was also a period of great mobility. Groups 
of people travelled long distances in search of 
opportunity. The subcontinent held immense wealth 
and the possibilities for people to carve a fortune. One 
group of people who became important in this period 
were the Rajputs, a name derived from “Rajaputra”, 
the son of a ruler. Between the eighth and fourteenth 
centuries, the term was applied more generally to a 
group of warriors who claimed Kshatriya caste status. 
Fig. 3 
The Persian wheel. 


8
?
The term included not just rulers and chieftains but 
also soldiers and commanders who served in the 
armies of different monarchs all over the subcontinent. 
A chivalric code of conduct – extreme valour and a 
great sense of loyalty – were the qualities attributed 
to Rajputs by their poets and bards. Other groups 
and Kayasthas (a caste of scribes and secretaries) 
also used the opportunities of the age to become 
politically important. 
Throughout this period there was a gradual 
clearing of forests and the extension of agriculture, 
a change faster and more complete in some areas 
than in others. Changes in their habitat forced many 
forest-dwellers to migrate. Others started tilling the 
land and became peasants. These new peasant groups 
chieftains, priests, monasteries and temples. They 
became a part of large, complex societies, and were 
required to pay taxes and offer goods and services 
to local lords. As a result, significant economic 
and social differences emerged amongst peasants. 
kept cattle, and some combined artisanal work with 
agricultural activity during the lean season. As society 
became more differentiated, people were grouped into 
 or sub-castes and ranked on the basis of their 
backgrounds and their occupations. Ranks were not 
the 
 The status of the same 
 could vary from 
area to area. 
Jatis framed their own rules and regulations 
to manage the conduct of their members. These 
regulations were enforced by an assembly of elders, 
described in some areas as the jati panchayat. But jatis 
were also required to follow the rules of their villages. 
they were only one small unit of a state.
Of the 
technological, 
economic, social 
and cultural 
changes described 
in this section, 
which do you 
think were most 
significant in the 
town or village in 
which you live?
Habitat
Refers to the 
environment of 
a region and 
the social and 
economic lifestyle 
of its residents.
 


9
INTRODUCTION: TRA... 
Region and Empire
 
(see Chapter 2 for an example of a 
) praising 
explained that he was the ruler of a vast empire that 
stretched from Bengal (Gauda) in the east to Ghazni 
(Gajjana) in Afghanistan in the west and included all 
of south India (Dravida). People of different regions – 
Gauda, Andhra, Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra and 
Map 3
Provinces of the Delhi 
Sultanate during 
Muhammad Tughluq’s 
reign according to 
the Egyptian source 
Masalik 
Mamalik al-Amsar of 
Shihabuddin Umari.


10
?
?
Why do you think 
rulers made such 
claims?
regard these as exaggerated claims of conquests. 
At the same time, they try to understand why rulers 
kept claiming to have control over different parts of 
the subcontinent. 
Language and region 
In 1318, the poet Amir Khusrau noted that there was 
a different language in every region of this land: Sindhi, 
Lahori, Kashmiri, Dvarsamudri (in southern Karnataka), 
Telangani (in Andhra Pradesh), Gujari (in Gujarat), Ma‘bari 
(in Tamil Nadu), Gauri, (in Bengal) … Awadhi (in eastern 
Uttar Pradesh) and Hindawi (in the area around Delhi). 
Amir Khusrau went on to explain that in contrast to 
these languages, there was Sanskrit which did not 
belong to any region. It was an old language and “common 
people do not know it, only the Brahmanas do”.
Make a list of the languages mentioned by Amir 
Khusrau. Prepare another list of the names of languages  
spoken today in the regions he mentioned. Underline 
the names that are similar and circle those that  
are different. 
Did you notice that the names by which languages 
are known have changed over time? 
By 700 many regions already possessed distinct 
geographical dimensions and their own language and 
cultural characteristics. You will learn more about 
these in Chapter 7. They were also associated with 
like the Cholas, Khaljis, Tughluqs and Mughals 
were able to build an empire that was pan-regional – 
spanning diverse regions. Not all these empires were 
equally stable or successful. 


11
INTRODUCTION: TRA... 
?
?
When the Mughal Empire declined in the eighteenth 
century, it led to the re-emergence of regional states 
had altered the character of the regions. Across most of 
the subcontinent, the regions were left with the legacies 
of the big and small states that had ruled over them. 
This was apparent in the emergence of many distinct 
and shared traditions: in the realms of governance, 
the management of the economy, elite cultures and 
language. Through the thousand years between 700 
and 1750, the character of the different regions did 
not grow in isolation. These regions felt the impact of 
larger pan-regional forces of integration without ever 
quite losing their distinctiveness. 
Old and New Religions
The thousand years of history that we are exploring 
witnessed major developments in religious traditions. 
People’s belief in the divine was sometimes deeply 
personal, but more usually it was collective. Collective 
belief in a supernatural agency – religion – was often 
closely connected with the social and economic 
organisation of local communities. As the social worlds 
of these groups altered, so too did their beliefs.
It was during this period that important changes 
occurred in what we call Hinduism today. These 
included the worship of new deities, the construction 
of temples by royalty and the growing importance of 
Brahmanas, the priests, as dominant groups in society. 
Brahmanas a lot of respect in society. Their dominant 
position was consolidated by the support of their 
patrons – new rulers searching for prestige.  
One of the major developments of this period was the 
emergence of the idea of bhakti – of a loving, personal 
deity that devotees could reach without the aid of 
priests or elaborate rituals. You will be learning about 
this, and other traditions, in Chapter 6. 
Find out whether 
and for how long 
your state was a 
part of these  
pan-regional 
empires. 
Do you remember 
what Amir 
Khusrau had to 
say regarding 
Sanskrit, 
knowledge and 
Brahmanas? 
Patron
wealthy individual 
who supports 
another person – 
an artiste, 
a craftsperson, a
learned man, or 
a noble.


12
This was also the period when new religions 
appeared in the subcontinent. Merchants and 
to India in the seventh century. Muslims regard the 
 as their holy book and accept the sovereignty 
of the one God, Allah, whose love, mercy and bounty 
embrace all those who believe in Him, without regard 
to social background.
Many rulers were patrons of Islam and the 
learned theologians and jurists. And like Hinduism, 
Islam was interpreted in a variety of ways by its 
that the Prophet Muhammad’s son-in-law, Ali, was 
the legitimate leader of the Muslim community, and 
the early leaders (Khalifas) of the community, and 
the succeeding Khalifas. There were other important 
and
 
mystic traditions.
Thinking about Time and                  
Historical Periods
Historians do not see time just as a passing of hours, 
days or years – as a clock or a calendar. Time also 
in the persistence and transformation of ideas and 
beliefs. The study of time is made somewhat easier by 
dividing the past into large segments – periods – that 
possess shared characteristics. 
In the middle of the nineteenth century, British 
historians divided the history of India into three 
periods: “Hindu”, “Muslim” and “British”.  This division 
was based on the idea that the religion of rulers was the 
only important historical change, and that there were 
rich diversity of the subcontinent.  


13
INTRODUCTION: TRA... 
Few historians follow this periodisation today. Most 
look to economic and social factors to characterise 
the major elements of different moments of the past. 
The histories you read last year included a wide range 
of early societies – hunter-gatherers, early farmers, 
people living in towns and villages, and early empires 
and kingdoms. The histories you will be studying this 
more about the spread of peasant societies, the rise of 
regional and imperial state formations – sometimes at 
the cost of pastoral and forest people – the development 
of Hinduism and Islam as major religions and the 
arrival of European trading companies.  
 These thousand years of Indian history witnessed 
considerable change. After all, the sixteenth and 
eighteenth centuries were quite different from the 
eighth or the eleventh. Therefore, describing the entire 
period as one historical unit is not without its problems. 
Moreover, the “medieval” period is often contrasted with 
the “modern” period. “Modernity” carries with it a sense 
of material progress and intellectual advancement. This 
seems to suggest that the medieval period was lacking 
in any change whatsoever. But of course we know this 
was not the case.
 During these thousand years, the societies of the 
subcontinent were transformed often and economies 
in several regions reached a level of prosperity that 
attracted the interest of European trading companies. 
As you read this book, look out for signs of change 
and the historical processes at work. Also, whenever 
you can, compare what you read in this book with 
continuities wherever you can, and look at the world 
around you to see what else has changed or remained 
the same. 


14
 
  Imagine
You are a historian. Choose one of the 
themes mentioned in this chapter, 
such as economic, social or political 
history, and discuss why you think 
history of that theme. 
Let’s recall 
 1. Who was considered a “foreigner” in the past? 
700. 
(b) The Marathas asserted their political importance 
during this period. 
(c) Forest-dwellers were sometimes pushed out 
of their lands with the spread of agricultural 
settlements. 
Manipur and Kashmir. 
(a) Archives are places where _______________  are  
  
kept. 
(b) _______________ was a fourteenth-century  
 
 
 
 
chronicler.
(c) _____, _____, _____, _____ and _____ were some  
 
of the new crops introduced into the  
 
 
 
subcontinent during this period. 
this period. 
KEYWORDS
manuscript
 
region
 periodisation 


15
INTRODUCTION: TRA... 
 5.  What were some of the major religious developments 
during this period?
Let’s understand
 6. In what ways has the meaning of the term “Hindustan” 
changed over the centuries? 
 7. How were the affairs of 
 regulated? 
Let’s discuss
manuscripts?
 10. How do historians divide the past into periods? Do they 
face any problems in doing so?
Let’s do 
 11. Compare either Map 1 or Map 2 with the present-day 
map of the subcontinent, listing as many similarities 
 12. Find out where records are kept in your village or city. 
Who writes these records? Is there an archive? Who 
manages it? What kinds of documents are stored there? 
Who are the people who use it? 


