24
Social and Political Life
How
the State
Government
Works
Last year, we discussed the
fact that government works at
three levels ² local, state and
national ² and looked at the
work of local government in
some detail. In this chapter,
we examine the work of the
government at the state
level. How does this take
place in a democracy?
What is the role of a
Member of the Legislative
Assembly (MLA) and
Ministers? How do people
express their views or
demand action from
government? We look at these
questions through the example
of health.
3
CHAPTER
WHOSE RESPONSIBILITY?
Hey, look at this...it says that
there is a water shortage in
our state, and people are
falling sick!
´...In many villages, people were found to be
drinking unclean water. Streams have dried up, and
so have tanks. In the worst-affected areas, villagers
have been carrying water across great distances.µ
´People at the district HQ Patalpuram receive water
supply once in three days. The District Hospital here is
overflowing with patients ² a large number of whom
are children with acute diarrhoea...µ


25
Who is an MLA?
In the above section, you have read about some
events in Patalpuram. You may be familiar with some
official names such as Collector, Medical Officer, etc.
But have you heard of an MLA and the Legislative
Assembly? Do you know the MLA of your area? Can
you identify which party she or he belongs to?
Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs) are
elected by the people. They then become members
of the legislative assembly and also form the
On the TV news, they said ten people
have died from diarrhoea! Is that
possible? Can one really die from it?
Who knows? Just
hope I don·t get it!
Ha ha!
My mother said not to have any iced
drinks from the market. She gave one of
her lectures this morning, ´You have to
be responsible for your health,
Shirin!µ
Suddenly...
STOP!
Really! Why? Has
he done something?
Shh...I saw him on TV
too. He is a member of
the Opposition!
What a loud voice he has...he must be
a leader or something...
...and we demand that the
authorities take immediate action to
bring the public health situation
under control! Our MLA must take
the responsibility for this!
This road is blocked due to the rally.
They have gheraoed the MLA·s  residence.
Ha ha ² they
seem more angry
about what he
hasn·t done!
What is happening in Patalpuram ?
Why is this problem serious?
What action do you think can be
taken in the above situation and
who do you think should take this
action? Discuss.
That afternoon...
25
Chapter 3: How the State Government Works


26
Social and Political Life
Discuss the following terms with
your teacher²public meeting,
States in India, constituency,
majority, ruling party and
opposition.
Can you explain the following
terms²majority, ruling party,
opposition with reference to your
state.
government. In this way we say that the MLAs
represent people. The example below will help us
understand this better.
Every state in India has a Legislative Assembly.
Each state is divided into different areas or
constituencies. For example, look at the map below.
It shows that the state of Himachal Pradesh is divided
into 68 assembly constituencies. From each
constituency, the people elect one representative who
then becomes a Member of the Legislative Assembly
(MLA). You would have noticed that people stand for
elections in the name of different parties. These MLAs,
therefore, belong to different political parties.
How do people who are MLAs become ministers or
chief minister? A political party whose MLAs have
won more than half the number of constituencies in
a state can be said to be in a majority. The political
party that has the majority is called the ruling party
and all other members are called the opposition. For
example, the Legislative Assembly of the state of
Himachal Pradesh has 68 MLA constituencies.
The state of  Himachal Pradesh is
coloured in purple in the above
thumbnail map of India.
Using a pencil outline the following on the
map given on page 97:
  (i) the state that you live in;
(ii) the state of Himachal Pradesh.
Jammu and Kashmir
Punjab
Uttarakhand


27
Construct a table, similar to the
one given for Himachal Pradesh,
for your state.
Results of the Assembly Elections in Himachal Pradesh in 2017
Political party
Number of MLAs elected
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) ............................................................. 44
Indian National Congress (INC) ................................................... 21
Communist Party of India (Marxist)............................................... 1
Independents (who don·t belong to any party) .......................... 2
Total ................................................................................ 68
The Head of the State is the Governor.
She/He is appointed by the Central
Government to ensure that the State
Government works within the rules and
regulations of the Constitution. Find out the
name of Governor of your State.
At times, the ruling party may not
be a single party but a group of
parties working together. This is
called a coalition. Discuss with
your teacher.
Candidates from various political parties won the
2017 assembly elections and became MLAs. Since
the total number of MLAs in the Legislative Assembly
is 68, a political party would have needed to have
more than 34 MLAs in order to gain a majority. The
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) with 44 MLAs had the
majority and it became the ruling party. All other MLAs
became the opposition. In this case, the Indian National
Congress (INC) was the major opposition party, since it
had the largest number of MLAs after the BJP. Among
the opposition were other parties, including those who
had been elected as independent candidates.
After the elections, the MLAs belonging to the
ruling party will elect their leader who will become
the chief minister. In this case, the BJP MLAs chose
Shri Jairam Thakur as their leader and he became
the chief minister. The chief minister then selects
other people as ministers. After the elections, it is
the Governor of the state who appoints the chief
minister and other ministers.
The chief minister and other ministers have the
responsibility of running various government
departments or ministries. They have separate offices.
A Legislative Assembly is a place where all the MLAs,
whether from the ruling party or from the opposition
meet to discuss various things. Hence, some MLAs
have dual responsibilities: one as an MLA and the
other as a minister. We will read about this further.
Chapter 3: How the State Government Works
For more details, visit http://hpvidhansabha.nic.in


28
Social and Political Life
A debate in the Legislative Assembly
Afreen, Sujata and many other students from their
school travelled to the state capital to visit the
Legislative Assembly which was housed in an
impressive building. The children were excited. After
security checks, they were taken upstairs. There was
a gallery from where they could see the large hall
below. There were rows and rows of desks.
 This Assembly was going to have a debate on a
current problem. During this time, MLAs can express
their opinions and ask questions related to the issue
or give suggestions about what should be done by
the government. Those who wish to, can respond to
this. The minister then replies to the questions and
tries to assure the Assembly that adequate steps are
being taken.
 The chief minister and other ministers have to
take decisions and run the government. We usually
hear about them or see them in the news channels
or in the papers. However, whatever decisions are
being taken have to be approved by the members of
the legislative assembly. In a democracy, these
members can ask questions, debate an important
issue, decide where money should be spent, etc. They
have the main authority.
MLA 1: In my constituency of Akhandagaon,
during the last three weeks, there were 15 deaths
because of diarrhoea. I think it is a shame that this
government has not been able to check the situation
of a simple problem like diarrhoea while proclaiming
itself to be a champion of technology. I would call
the attention of the minister in charge of health to
take immediate measures to control the situation.
MLA 2: My question is why are government
hospitals in such a bad situation? Why is the
government not appointing proper doctors and other
medical staff in the district? I would also like to know
how the government plans to deal with this situation
28
Social and Political Life


29
Can you identify the MLAs of the
ruling party and the opposition in
the illustration? Colour the ruling
party in one colour and the
opposition in another.
which is affecting a large number of people and is
also spreading. This is an epidemic.
MLA 3: My constituency of Tolpatti too has a
serious shortage of water. Women travel up to 3 or 4
kilometres to collect water. How many tankers have
been put into service to supply water? How many
wells and ponds have been cleaned and disinfected?
MLA 4: I think my colleagues are exaggerating the
problem. The government has taken steps to control
the situation. Water tankers have been put into
service. ORS packets are being distributed. The
government is doing everything possible to help
people.
MLA 5: We have very poor facilities in our hospitals.
There are hospitals that do not have a doctor and no
medical staff has been appointed for the last few
years. In another hospital, the doctor has gone on a
long leave. This is a shame. I think the situation is
going from bad to worse. How are we going to
ensure that ORS packets reach all families in the
affected areas?
MLA 6: The opposition members are unnecessarily
blaming the government. The previous government
did not pay any attention to sanitation. We have now
taken up a drive to clear the garbage that has been
lying around for years.
1
2
5
3
4
6


30
Social and Political Life
What were the main arguments
put forward by different MLAs
who thought that the government
was not taking the situation in a
serious manner?
If you were the health minister,
how would you respond to the
above discussion?
Do you think the above debate
would have been useful in some
ways? How? Discuss.
In the working of the government,
explain the difference between
being an MLA and an MLA who is
also a minister.
In the earlier section you have read about a debate
in the Legislative Assembly. The members were
debating the action taken or not taken by the
government. This is because the MLAs are together
responsible for the work of the government. In
common usage the word ¶government· refers to
government departments and various ministers who
head them. The overall head is the chief minister.
More correctly, this is called the executive part of
the government. All the MLAs who gather together
(assemble) in the legislative assembly are called the
Legislature. They are the ones who authorise and
supervise their work. As we saw in the earlier section,
it is from among them that the head of the executive,
or the chief minister is formed.
Working of the government
The Legislative Assembly is not the only place where
opinions are expressed about the work of the
government and action is demanded. You will find
newspapers, TV channels and other organisations
regularly talking about the government. In a
democracy, there are various ways through which
people express their views and also take action. Let
us look at one such way.
Soon after the discussion in the assembly, there
was a press conference organised by the health
minister. Large numbers of people from different
newspapers were present. The minister and some
government officials were also present. The minister
explained the steps the government had taken.
Reporters asked many questions at this meeting.
These discussions were then reported in different
newspapers. The following page has one such report.
During the next week, the chief minister and the
minister for health visited Patalpuram district. They
went to visit the families who had lost their relatives
and also visited people in the hospitals. The
government announced a compensation for these


31
Write two measures that the
goverment undertook for
controlling diarrhoea?
What is the purpose of a
press conference? How does
the press conference help you
get information on what the
goverment is doing?
families. The chief minister also said that he thought
the problem was not only one of sanitation but also
of a lack of clean drinking water. He said that a high-
level enquiry committee will be asked to look into
the needs of the district to provide sanitation facilities
and would request the minister for Public Works to
take care of the needs of proper water supply in the
region.
As you saw above, the people in power like the
chief minister and the minister have to take action.
They do so through various departments like the
Public Works Department, the Agriculture
Department, the Health Department, the Education
Department and so on. They also have to answer
questions that are asked in the Legislative Assembly
and convince people asking the questions that proper
steps are being taken. At the same time, newspapers
and the media widely discuss the issue and the
government has to respond, for example, by holding
the press conferences.
During the last few weeks,
there have been many
deaths in some districts of
our state. There has been a
strong reaction that the
government has not taken
this seriously. The health
minister explained today at
a press conference that his
government has asked all
the collectors and the chief
medical officers to take
urgent measures. The most
important problem is that
of drinking water. The
minister said that they
intend to supply drinking
water to every village
through tanker trucks.
The chief minister has
promised funds for this
work. They also plan to
start a campaign to inform
people about the steps that
can be taken to prevent
diarrhoea. When a reporter
asked him as to what steps
are being taken to see that
garbage that has been lying
around for months is
quickly collected, the chief
minister said that he would
look into this.
Patalpuram | Ravi Ahuja
Chapter 3: How the State Government Works


In a democracy, people organise meetings
to voice their opinions and protest
against the government.
 The government can also decide to make new laws
for the state regarding sanitation and health facilities.
For example, it may make it compulsory for
municipal corporations to ensure that there are
adequate toilets in every urban area. It may also
ensure that a health worker is appointed in every
village. This act of making laws on certain issues is
done in the Legislative Assembly of each state. The
various government departments then implement
these laws. Laws for the entire country are made in
the Parliament. You will read more about the
Parliament next year.
In a democracy, it is the people who elect their
representatives as Members of the Legislative
Assembly (MLAs) and, thus, it is the people who have
the main authority. The ruling party members then
form the government and some members are
appointed ministers. These ministers are in charge
of various departments of the government such as
health in the above example. Whatever work is done
by these departments has to be approved by the
members of the legislative assembly.


Find out with the help of your
teacher, the work done by the
government departments
mentioned above, and fill in the
table.
Name of department
Examples of their work
School Education
Public Works Department
Agriculture
After introducing the topic and having a brief discussion
with the whole class, the teacher divides the class into groups.
The group discusses the issue and decides what it would like
to include in the wall-paper. Children then work
individually or in pairs to read the collected material and
write their observations or experiences. They can do this
through creating stories, poems, case studies, interviews, etc.
The group looks at the material that they have
selected, drawn or written. They read each otherĬs
writing and provide feedback to each other. They
make decisions on what should be included and
finalise the layout for the wallpaper.
A wallpaper project
A wallpaper is an interesting activity through which
research can be done on particular topics of interest.
The following photographs explain the different
aspects involved in creating a wallpaper in a
classroom.
Chapter 3: How the State Government Works
33


Each group then presents the wallpaper to the entire class. It is important that
more than one member of the group is asked to present and that each group is
allotted the same amount of time to discuss their work. After each group has
presented, it would be a good idea to have a feedback session on the following ĩ
What more could they do on their own? How could their work be organised
better? How could writing and presentation be improved upon?
Do a similar wallpaper project
about any issue connected with
the working of your State
Government like an  education
programme, any law and order
issue, midday meal scheme, etc.
This wallpaper about the 2006
dengue epidemic was prepared by
children of Class VI B of Kendriya
Vidyalaya II, Hindon, Ghaziabad,
Uttar Pradesh.
34
Social and Political Life


1.
Use the terms ¶constituency· and ¶represent· to explain
who an MLA is and how is the person elected?
2.
How did some MLAs become Ministers? Explain.
3.
Why should decisions taken by the Chief Minister and
other ministers be debated in the Legislative Assembly?
4.
What was the problem in Patalpuram? What discussion/
action was taken by the following? Fill in the table.
EXERCISES
Public meeting
Legislative Assembly
Press conference
Chief Minister
Glossary
Constituency: A particular area from which all the voters living there choose their representatives.
This could be, for example, a panchayat ward or an area that chooses an MLA.
Majority: This is a situation when more than half the number in a group supports a decision or an
idea. This is also called a simple majority.
Opposition: This refers to elected representatives who are not members of the ruling party and
who play the role of questioning government decisions and actions as well as raise new issues for
consideration in the Assembly.
Press Conference: A gathering of journalists from the media who are invited to hear about and
ask questions on a particular issue and are then expected to report on this to the larger public.
5.
What is the difference between the work that MLAs do in
the Assembly and the work done by government
departments?
Chapter 3: How the State Government Works
35


UNIT
THREE


Gender
Teacher·s note
Gender is a term that you may often have
heard. It is a term, however, that is not
easily understood. It tends to remain
distant from our lives and restricted to
discussions during training programmes.
In fact, it is something that all of us
experience in our lives on a daily basis. It
determines, for example, who we are and
what we will become, where we can go and
where not, the life choices available to us
and those we eventually make. Our
understanding of gender is often based on
the family and society that we live in. This
leads us to think that the roles we see men
and women around us play are fixed and
natural. In fact, these roles differ across
communities around the world. By gender,
then, we mean the many social values and
stereotypes our cultures attach to the
biological distinction ¶male· and ¶female·. It
is a term that helps us to understand many
of the inequalities and power relations
between men and women in society.
The following two chapters explore the
concept of gender without actually using
the term. Instead, through different
pedagogic tools like case studies, stories,
classroom activities, data analysis and
photographs, students are encouraged to
question and think about their own lives
and the society around them. Gender is
often mistakenly thought to be something
that concerns women or girls alone. Thus,
care has been taken in these chapters to
draw boys into the discussion as well.
Chapter 4 uses two case studies, situated
in different places and points in time to
show how girls and boys are brought up
or socialised differently. This enables them
to understand that the process of
socialisation is not uniform; instead it is
socially determined and changes
continuously over time. The chapter also
addresses the fact that societies assign
different values to the roles men and
women play and the work they do, which
becomes a basis for inequality and
discrimination. Through a storyboard,
students discuss the issue of housework.
Done primarily by women, housework is
often not considered ¶work· and, therefore
made invisible and devalued.
 Chapter 5 further develops ideas around
gender inequalities in the world of work and
describes women·s struggles for equality.
Through a classroom activity, students
begin questioning existing stereotypes
regarding work and career choices. The
chapter also points out that opportunities
like education are not equally available to
boys and girls. By reading about the lives
of two Indian women, from the ninteenth
and twentieth centuries, students see how
women struggled to change their lives by
learning to read and write. Change on a
large scale usually takes place through
collective struggles. The chapter concludes
with a photo-essay that gives examples of
different strategies the women·s movement
has used to fight for change.
37


