10
Social and Political Life
Chapter 1: On Equality
UNIT
TWO


11
Teacher·s note
These two chapters (Chapters 2 and 3) on
State Government are an attempt to
discuss the functions and structure of
government through concrete situations.
We have chosen ¶health· as an example;
there could have been other, equally
important, choices.
Chapter 2 discusses ¶health· as an
important issue for people. There are both
public and private aspects of health
provisioning. Healthcare in India is not
available to all. While the Constitution
supports a view that the right to health is
an aspect of our fundamental rights, its
provisioning is rather unequal. Through
the accounts provided, learners will begin
to visualise the ideal or desired role of
government, and the meanings behind its
structures. Some ways in which this
situation can be changed are also
discussed.
Chapter 3 focuses on how the
government functions, and discusses ideas
of representation, accountability and
public welfare. Though both the executive
and the legislature are presented, one
should not expect students to retain fine
distinctions. It would be best to patiently
encourage them to ask questions such as,
´Who is the most powerful person?µ, ´Why
can·t the MLA solve the problem?µ, etc.
Such queries will enable them to construct
a sense of the government apparatus.
It is important that learners acquire the
confidence to express their views on public
issues and understand the role of
government through the exercises given in
the chapters. You could choose familiar
issues such as water, transport, school-
fees, books, child-labour, etc., for them to
discuss and arrive at how these problems
need to be tackled. Allow them to express
these ideas through wall charts. Given that
discussions on the government and its
functioning often lead to boredom and
cynicism, we need to be able to make
the classroom session less didactic and
more interactive while teaching these
lessons.
State Government
11


12
2
CHAPTER
In a democracy people expect the
government to work for their welfare. This
could be through the provision of
education, health, employment, housing
or the development of roads, electricity
etc. In this chapter we shall examine the
meanings and problems related to health.
Look at the sub-headings of this chapter.
In what ways do you think this topic is
related to the work of government?
Role of the
Government
in Health


13
13
What is health?
We can think of health in many ways. Health means
our ability to remain free of illness and injuries. But
health isn·t only about disease. You may have
associated only some of the situations in the above
collage with health. What we often ignore is the fact
that each of the above situations is related to health.
Apart from disease, we need to think of other factors
that affect our health. For example, if people get clean
drinking water or a pollution free environment they
are likely to be healthy. On the other hand, if people
do not get adequate food to eat or have to live in
cramped conditions, they will be prone to illness.
All of us would like to be active and in good spirits
in whatever we may be doing. It isn·t healthy to be
dull, inactive, anxious or scared for long stretches of
time. We all need to be without mental strain. All of
these various aspects of our lives are a part of health.
Pick two situations from the above
collage that are not related to
illness and write two sentences on
how they are related to health.
Would you associate all or some of
these pictures with ¶health· ? In
what ways? Discuss in groups.
Chapter 2: Role of the Government in Health




15
Patients usually have to wait in long
queues in government hospitals, like
this one.
India has a large number of doctors, clinics and
hospitals. The country also has considerable
experience and knowledge in running a public
healthcare system. This is a system of hospitals and
health centres run by the government. It has the
ability to look after the health of a large section of
its population scattered over hundreds of thousands
of villages. We will go into more detail on this later.
Moreover, there has been a phenomenal
advancement in medical sciences whereby many new
technologies and treatment procedures are available
in the country.
However, the second column points out how poor
the health situation in our country is. With all the
above positive developments we are not able to provide
proper healthcare facilities to people. This is the
paradox ² something that is contrary to what we
would expect. Our country has the money, knowledge
and people with experience but cannot make the
necessary healthcare available to all. In this chapter,
we will look at some of the reasons for this.
Chapter 2: Role of the Government in Health


16
Social and Political Life
THE COST OF A CURE
Aman and Ranjan are good friends. While Ranjan
comes from a well-to-do family, Aman·s parents have
to struggle to make ends meet...
Hi Aman! Good to
see you back! How have
you been?
I had viral fever and
had to go to the
hospital...
Oh! Me, too! I just got back to
school on Monday. My Daddy
took me to see the doctor
at the new hospital in
Kingsway. It was very exciting!
The building looked so posh. I thought it
was a five star hotel! Daddy said that was
because it was a private hospital, with the
best of facilities.
Daddy had to pay Rs 500 at the reception counter
itself ² before we even met the doctor! There was
nice music playing and everything was really clean
and shiny.
The doctor asked for many tests...but
everyone was so friendly! The lady who took
my blood for testing told me so many jokes
that I forgot to feel the pain!
...and have you
heard the one
about Batman
on Reality TV?
After the test results came, we went back to the
doctor. He looked through them and said everything
was fine, and I only had viral fever. He prescribed some
medicines and rest.
...and so young man ² this pink pill should be
taken three times a day, and the white tablet
once before bed time ² that·s for the
bodyache! This one is a syrup ² don·t
worry, it·s tasty
Thank you
Doctor...I feel
better
already!


17
You see, I·ve been dying to tell you all
about it! But what about
you? Which hospital did
you go to?
Um...it wasn·t as nice as your·s
at all! At first, Abba didn·t want
to take me because he said it
would take too much time...
When our turn came, the doctor examined me, and
asked for a blood test. Then we had to go and stand in
another long queue! People were crowding around in
the testing room too.
We got the test results after three days...and went
back to the hospital. There was a different doctor
that day.
Show me his OPD
card...and the test results
² quickly please!
He seems to be suffering from
a bout of viral fever ² nothing
to worry about.  All he needs
is this one fever-reducing
medicine.
My hospital was nice, but
they gave me many medicines
and the whole thing
cost quite a lot!
Oh! My treatment
did not cost much!
...and it really did! We went to a big
Government Hospital. We had to wait in a long
queue at the OPD counter. I was feeling so sick
that I had to lean on Abba all the time!


18
Social and Political Life
Where do you go when you are ill?
Are there any problems that you
face? Write a paragraph based on
your experience.
What problems did Aman face in
the government hospital? How do
you think the hospital can work in
a better manner? Discuss.
Why did Ranjan have to spend so
much money? Give reasons.
What problems do we face in
private hospitals? Discuss.
Public and private health care services
From the above story, you must have understood
that we can roughly divide up various health care
facilities in two categories ²
(a) Public health services and
(b) Private health facilities.
Public health services
The public health service is a chain of health centres
and hospitals run by the government. They are linked
together so that they cover both rural and urban
areas and can also provide treatment to all kinds of
problems ² from common illnesses to special services.
At the village level there are health centres where
there is usually a nurse and a village health worker.
They are trained in dealing with common illnesses
and work under the supervision of doctors at the
Primary Health Centre (PHC). Such a centre covers
many villages in a rural area. At the district level is
the District Hospital that also supervises all the health
centres. Large cities have many government hospitals
such as the one where Aman was taken and also
specialised government hospitals.
The health service is called ¶public· for many
reasons. In order to fulfil its commitment of providing
health care to all citizens, the government has
established these hospitals and health centres. Also,
the resources needed to run these services are
obtained from the money that we, the public, pay to
the government as taxes. Hence, such facilities are
meant for everyone. One of the most important
aspects of the public health system is that it is meant
to provide quality health care services either free or
at a low cost, so that even the poor can seek
treatment. Another important function of public
health is to take action to prevent the spread of
diseases such as TB, malaria, jaundice, cholera,
Why pay taxes to the government?
Government uses tax money for
providing many public services for
the benefit of all citizens. Some
services such as defence, police,
judicial system, highways etc.
benefit all citizens. Otherwise, the
citizens cannot organise these
services for themselves.
Taxes fund developmental
programmes and services such as
education, health care,
employment, social welfare,
vocational training etc. required for
needy citizens. Tax money is
utilised for relief and rehabilitation
in case of natural disasters such as
floods, earthquakes, tsunami etc.
Space, nuclear, and missile
programmes are also funded from
the revenues collected as taxes.
Government provides some
services especially for the poor
who cannot afford to purchase
them from the market. One
example is health care. Can you
give other examples?


19
In what ways is the public health
system meant for everyone?
List some Primary Health Centres
(PHCs) or hospitals near your place.
From your experience (or by
visiting any one of them), find out
the facilities provided and people
who run the centre.
A doctor in a rural health care centre
giving medicines to a patient.
diarrhoea, chikungunya, etc. This has to be
organised by the government with the participation
of people otherwise it is not effective. For example,
when taking up a campaign to see that mosquitoes
do not breed in water coolers, rooftops, etc., this
has to be done for all houses in the area.
According to our Constitution, it is the primary
duty of the government to ensure the welfare of the
people and provide health care facilities to all.
The government must safeguard the Right to Life
of every person. If a hospital cannot provide timely
medical treatment to a person, it means that this
protection of life is not being given.
The Court also said that it was the duty of the
government to provide the necessary health services,
including treatment in emergency situations.
Hospitals and medical staff must fulfil their duty of
providing the necessary treatment. Therefore, the
Court asked the State Government to give him the
money that he had spent on his treatment.
Private health facilities
There is a wide range of private health facilities that
exist in our country. A large number of doctors run
their own private clinics. In the rural areas, one
finds Registered Medical Practitioners (RMPs). Urban
areas have a large number of doctors, many of them
providing specialised services. There are hospitals
and nursing homes that are privately owned. There
are many laboratories that do tests and offer special
facilities such as X-ray, ultrasound, etc. There are
also shops from where we buy medicines.
As the name suggests, private health facilities
are not owned or controlled by the government.
Unlike the public health services, in private
facilities, patients have to pay a lot of money for
every service that they use.
A woman and her sick child at a
government hospital. According to
UNICEF, more than a million children
die every year in India from preventable
infections.
Chapter 2: Role of the Government in Health


20
Social and Political Life
Today the presence of private facilities can be seen
all around. In fact now there are large companies
that run hospitals and some are engaged in
manufacturing and selling medicines. Medical shops
are found in every corner of the country.
Healthcare and equality:
Is adequate healthcare available to all?
In India, we face a situation where private services
are increasing but public services are not. What is
then available to people are mainly private services.
These are concentrated in urban areas. The cost of
these services is rather high. Medicines are
expensive. Many people cannot afford them or have
to borrow money when there is an illness in the
family.
Some private services encourage incorrect
practices to earn more. At times inexpensive
alternatives, though available, may not be used. For
example, some medical practitioners are found to
prescribe superfluous medicines, injections or saline
when simple medication may suffice.
 In fact, barely 20 per cent of the population can
afford all the medicines that they require during an
illness. Hence, even for those whom one might not
20
Social and Political Life
Private health facilities can mean
many things. Explain with the help
of some examples from your area.
A post-operative room in a leading
private hospital in Delhi.
The Medical Council of India·s
Code of Medical Ethics states:
´Every physician should, as far as
possible, prescribe drugs with
generic names and he/she shall
ensure that there is a rational
prescription and use of drugs.µ
How can health care be made more
affordable? Discuss.


21
This pregnant lady has to travel many
kilometres to see a qualified doctor.
think as being poor, medical expenses cause
hardship. It was reported in a study that 40 per
cent of people who are admitted to a hospital for
some illness or injury have to borrow money or sell
some of their possessions to pay for the expenses.
For those who are poor, every illness in the family
is a cause of great anxiety and distress. What is worse
is that this situation tends to happen again and
again. Those who are poor are in the first place
undernourished. These families are not eating as
much as they should. They are not provided basic
necessities like drinking water, adequate housing,
clean surroundings, etc., and therefore, are more
likely to fall ill. The expenses on illness make their
situation even worse.
Sometimes it is not only the lack of money that
prevents people from getting proper medical
treatment. Women, for example, are not taken to a
doctor in a prompt manner. Women·s health
concerns are considered to be less important than
the health of men in the family. Many tribal areas
have few health centres and they do not run properly.
Even private health services are not available.
What can be done?
There is little doubt that the health situation of most
people in our country is not good. It is the
responsibility of the government to provide quality
healthcare services to all its citizens, especially the
poor and the disadvantaged. However, health is as
much dependent on basic amenities and social
conditions of the people, as it is on healthcare
services. Hence, it is important to work on both in
order to improve the health situation of our people.
And this can be done. Look at the following example.
Chapter 2: Role of the Government in Health
21
In rural areas, a jeep is often used to
serve as a mobile clinic for patients.
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
www.in.undp.org


22
Social and Political Life
The Kerala experience
In 1996, the Kerala government made some major
changes in the state. Forty per cent of the entire state
budget was given to panchayats. They could plan
and provide for their requirements. This made it
possible for a village to make sure that proper
planning was done for water, food, women·s
development and education. This meant that water
supply schemes were checked, the working of schools
and anganwadis was ensured and specific problems
of the village were taken up. Health centres were
also improved. All of this helped to improve the
situation. Despite these efforts, however, some
problems ² such as shortage of medicines,
insufficient hospital beds, not enough doctors ²
remained, and these needed to be addressed.
For more details, visit http://lsgkerala.gov.in/en
Let us look at an example of another country and
its approach to issues of health.
The Costa Rican approach
Costa Rica is considered to be one of the healthiest
countries in Central America. The main reason for
this can be found in the Costa Rican Constitution.
Several years ago, Costa Rica took a very important
decision and decided not to have an army. This
helped the Costa Rican government to spend the
money that the army would have used, on health,
education and other basic needs of the people. The
Costa Rican government believes that a country has
to be healthy for its development and pays a lot of
attention to the health of its people. The Costa Rican
government provides basic services and amenities
to all Costa Ricans. For example, it provides safe
drinking water, sanitation, nutrition and housing.
Health education is also considered very important
and knowledge about health is an essential part of
education at all levels.
The above map of India shows the state of
Kerala in pink.
Page 97 of this book has a map of India.
Using your pencil outline the state of
Kerala on this map.


23
Chapter 2: Role of the Government in Health
1.
In this chapter you have read that health is a wider concept
than illness. Look at this quote from the Constitution and
explain the terms ¶living standard· and ¶public health· in
your own words.
2.
 What are the different ways through which the government
can take steps to provide healthcare for all? Discuss.
3.
What differences do you find between private and public
health services in your area? Use the following table to
compare and contrast these.
EXERCISES
An important part of the
Constitution says it is the ´duty of
the State to raise the level of
nutrition and the standard of living
and to improve public health.µ
4.
¶Improvement in water and sanitation can control many
diseases.· Explain with the help of examples.
Glossary
Public: An activity or service that is meant for all people in the country and is mainly organised by the
government. This includes schools, hospitals, telephone services, etc. People can demand these
services and also raise questions about their non-functioning.
Private: An activity or service that is organised by an individual or company for their own gain.
Medical tourists: This refers to foreigners who come to this country specifically for medical treatment
at hospitals that offer world²class facilities at a lower cost than what they would have to pay in their
own countries.
Communicable diseases: These are diseases that are spread from one person to another in many
ways such as through water, food , air, etc.
OPD: This is the short form for ¶Out Patient Department·. This is where people are first brought in
and treated in a hospital without being admitted to any special ward.
Ethics: Moral principles that influence a person·s behaviour
Generic names: These are chemical names of the drugs. They help in identifying the ingredients.
They are globally recognised. For example, acetyl salicylic acid is the generic name of Aspirin.
Facility
Affordability
Availability
Quality
Private
Public
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
www.in.undp.org


