48
Social and Political Life
Women Change
the World
In the previous chapter, we saw how women·s
work in the home is not recognised as work. We
also read how doing household work and taking
care of family members is a full time job and
there are no specific hours at which it begins or
ends. In this chapter, we will look at work
outside the home, and understand how some
occupations are seen to be more suitable for men
than for women. We will also learn about how
women struggle for equality. Getting an education
was, and still is, one way in which new
opportunities were created for women. This
chapter will also briefly trace the different types
of efforts made by the women·s movement to
challenge discrimination in more recent
years.
5
CHAPTER


49
A farmer
A factory worker
A nurse
A scientist
A pilot
A teacher
Are there more images of men
than women?
In what kinds of jobs were there
more images of men than women?
Have all the nurses been drawn as
females? Why?
Are there fewer images of female
farmers? If so, why?
Category
Male image
Female image
Teacher
Farmer
Factory worker
Nurse
Scientist
Pilot
Who does what work?
Draw images of the following ²
See what images your class drew by filling in the
table below. Add up the number of male and female
images separately for each occupation.
49
Chapter 5: Women Change the World


50
Social and Political Life
83.6 per cent of working women in India
are engaged in agricultural work. Their
work includes planting, weeding,
harvesting and threshing. Yet, when we
think of a farmer we only think of a
man.
Source: NSS 61st Round (2004ĩ05)
Category
Male image
Female image
Teacher
5
25
Farmer
30
0
Factory worker
 25
5
Nurse
0
30
Scientist
25
5
Pilot
27
3
How does your class exercise
compare with Rosie Ma·am·s
class exercise?
Rosie Ma·am·s class has 30 children. She did the
same exercise in her class and here is the result.


51
Breaking stereotypes
Engine drivers are men. But 27-year-old Laxmi Lakra, from a
poor tribal family in Jharkhand has begun to change things.
She is the first woman engine driver for Northern Railways.
Laxmi·s parents are not literate but they struggled and
overcame many hardships to make sure their children got an
education. Laxmi studied in a government school. Even in school,
Laxmi helped with the housework and did odd jobs. She studied
hard and did well and then went on to get a diploma in
electronics. She then took the railway board exam and passed
it on her first attempt.
Laxmi says, ´I love challenges and the moment somebody says it
is not for girls, I make sure I go ahead and do it.µ  Laxmi has had
to do this several times in her life ² when she wanted to take electronics; when she rode
motorcycles at the polytechnic; and when she decided to become an engine driver.
Her philosophy is simple ² ´As long as I am having fun without harming anyone, as long as I am
doing well and helping my parents,  why should I not lead a lifestyle of my choice?µ
(Adapted from Driving Her Train by Neeta Lal, Women·s Features Service)
Fewer opportunities and rigid expectations
A lot of the children in Rosie Ma·am·s class drew
women as nurses and men as army officers. The
reason they did this is because they feel that outside
the home too, women are good at only certain jobs.
For example, many people believe that women make
better nurses because they are more patient and
gentle. This is linked to women·s roles within the
family. Similarly, it is believed that science requires
a technical mind and girls and women are not capable
of dealing with technical things.
Because so many people believe in these
stereotypes, many girls do not get the same support
that boys do to study and train to become doctors
and engineers. In most families, once girls finish
school, they are encouraged by their families to see
marriage as their main aim in life.
Chapter 5: Women Change the World


52
Social and Political Life
Read the story below and answer
the questions ²
If you were Xavier, what subject
would you choose and why?
In your experience, what are some
of the other pressures that boys
experience?
Xavier was happy with the results of his Class X
board exams. Though his marks in Science and
Maths were not high, he had done well in his
favourite subjects ² History and Languages.  When
his parents saw his report card, however, they did
not look pleased at all...
My Goodness! Xavier,  you have
managed only 65% in Maths. Your marks
in Physics are low too...
I know Mama, but it·s
okay, because I don·t
want to take Maths or
Science. I want to
study History.
   Why do you want to take History?
Think about your future.
You have to get a good job!
    History will not help. It has no scope!
But, but, I don·t like
Maths or Science!
Be sensible, son. Take Maths, and you can
study computers side by side. The job market
for computers is very good.
It is important to understand that we live in a
society in which all children face pressures from the
world around them. Sometimes, these come in the
form of demands from adults. At other times, they
can just be because of unfair teasing by our own
friends. Boys are pressurised to think about getting
a job that will pay a good salary. They are also teased
and bullied if they do not behave like other boys.
You may remember that in your Class VI book you
read about how boys at an early age are encouraged
not to cry in front of others.


53
Ramabai (1858ĩ1922), shown above
with her daughter, championed the cause
of womenĬs education. She never went to
school but learnt to read and write from
her parents. She was given the title
īPanditaĬ because she could read and
write Sanskrit, a remarkable
achievement as women then were not
allowed such knowledge. She went on to
set up a Mission in Khedgaon near Pune
in 1898, where widows and poor women
were encouraged not only to become
literate but to be independent. They were
taught a variety of skills from carpentry
to running a printing press, skills that
are not usually taught to girls even today.
The printing press can be seen in the
picture on the top left corner. RamabaiĬs
Mission is still active today.
Learning for change
Going to school is an extremely important part of
your life. As more and more children enter school
every year, we begin to think that it is normal for all
children to go to school. Today, it is difficult for us
to imagine that school and learning could be seen
as ´out of boundsµ or not appropriate for some
children. But in the past, the skill of reading and
writing was known to only a few. Most children learnt
the work their families or elders did. For girls, the
situation was worse. In communities that taught sons
to read and write, daughters were not allowed to learn
the alphabet. Even in families where skills like
pottery, weaving and craft were taught, the
contribution of daughters and women was only seen
as supportive. For example, in the pottery trade,
women collected the mud and prepared the earth
for the pots. But since they did not operate the wheel,
they were not seen as potters.
In the nineteenth century, many new ideas about
education and learning emerged. Schools became
more common and communities that had never
learnt reading and writing started sending their
children to school. But there was a lot of opposition
to educating girls even then. Yet many women and
men made efforts to open schools for girls. Women
struggled to learn to read and write.
Chapter 5: Women Change the World


54
Social and Political Life
Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain and her dreams about ¶Ladyland·
Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain (1880 ²1932) was born into a rich family who owned a lot of land.  Though
she knew how to read and write Urdu, she was stopped from learning Bangla and English. In those
days, English was seen as a language that would expose girls to new ideas, which people thought were
not correct for them. Therefore, it was mostly boys who were taught English. Rokeya learnt
to read and write Bangla and English with the support of her elder brother and an elder
sister.  She went on to become a writer. She wrote a remarkable story titled
Sultana·s Dream in 1905 to practise her English skills when she was merely 25
years old. This story imagined a woman called Sultana who reaches a place
called Ladyland. Ladyland is a place where women had the freedom to study,
work, and create inventions like controlling rain from the clouds and
flying air cars. In this Ladyland, the men had been sent into seclusion ²
their aggressive guns and other weapons of war defeated by the brain-
power of women. As Sultana travels in Ladyland with Sister Sarah,
she awakes to realise that she was only dreaming.
As you can see, Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain was dreaming of
women flying planes and cars even before girls were being
allowed to go to school! This was the way in which education
and learning had changed Rokeya·s own life.  Rokeya did not
stop at getting education just for herself. Her education gave
her the power not only to dream and write, but also to do
more ² to help other girls go to school and to build their
own dreams.  In 1910, she started a school for girls in Kolkata,
and to this day, the school is still functioning.
Learning to read and write led some
women to question the situation of
women in society. They wrote stories,
letters and autobiographies describing
their own experiences of inequality. In
their writings, they also imagined new
ways of thinking and living for both
men and women.
Let us read about the experience of Rashsundari
Devi (1800²1890), who was born in West Bengal,
some 200 years ago. At the age of 60, she wrote her
autobiography in Bangla. Her book titled Amar Jiban
is the first known autobiography written by an Indian
woman. Rashsundari Devi was a housewife from a
rich landlord·s family. At that time, it was believed
that if a woman learnt to read and write, she would
bring bad luck to her husband and become a widow!
Despite this, she taught herself how to read and write
in secret, well after her marriage.
´I would start working at dawn, and I would still
be at it until well beyond midnight. I had no rest in
between. I was only fourteen years old at the time. I
came to nurture a great longing: I would learn to
read and I would read a religious manuscript. I was


55
Unlike Rashsundari Devi and Rokeya
Hossain, who were not allowed to learn
to read and write, large numbers of girls
attend school in India today. Despite this,
there continue to be many girls who leave
school for reasons of poverty, inadequate
schooling facilities and discrimination.
Providing equal schooling facilities to
children from all communities and class
backgrounds, and particularly girls,
continues to be a challenge in India.
unlucky, in those days women were not educated.
Later, I began to resent my own thoughts. What is
wrong with me? Women do not read, how will I do
it? Then I had a dream: I was reading the manuscript
of Chaitanya Bhagabat (the life of a saint)« Later in
the day, as I sat cooking in the kitchen, I heard my
husband say to my eldest son: ´Bepin, I have left my
Chaitanya Bhagabat here. When I ask for it, bring it
in.µ He left the book there and went away. When the
book had been taken inside, I secretly took out a
page and hid it carefully. It was a job hiding it, for
nobody must find it in my hands. My eldest son was
practising his alphabets at that time. I hid one of
them as well. At times, I went over that, trying to
match letters from that page with the letters that I
remembered. I also tried to match the words with
those that I would hear in the course of my days.
With tremendous care and effort, and over a long
period of time, I learnt how to read«µ
After learning the alphabet, Rashsundari Devi was
able to read the Chaitanya Bhagabat. Through her
own writing she also gave the world an opportunity
to read about women·s lives in those days.
Rashsundari Devi wrote about her everyday life
experiences in details. There were days when she
did not have a moment·s rest, no time even to sit
down and eat!
Schooling and education today
Today, both boys and girls attend school in large
numbers. Yet, as we will see, there still remain
differences between the education of boys and girls.
India has a census every 10 years, which counts the
whole population of the country. It also gathers
detailed information about the people living in
India ² their age, schooling, what work they do, and
so on. We use this information to measure many
things, like the number of literate people, and the
ratio of men and women. According to the 1961
census, about 40 per cent of all boys and men
Chapter 5: Women Change the World
55
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
www.in.undp.org


56
Social and Political Life
Level
All
        SC
        ST
Boys
Girls
Total
Boys
Girls
Total
Boys
Girls
Total
Primary (Classes 1-5)
4.36
3.88
4.13
4.71
4.20
4.46
7.02
6.84
6.93
Upper Primary (Classes 6-8)
3.49
4.60
4.03
5.00
6.03
5.51
8.48
8.71
8.59
Secondary (Classes 9-10)
17.21
16.88
17.06
19.64
19.05
19.36
24.94 24.40
24.68
Source: Educational Statistics at a Glance, MHRD, 2018
What percentage of children leave
school at the upper primary level?
At which level of education do you
see the highest percentage of
children leaving?
Why do you think that the
percentage of Adivasi girls and
boys leaving school is higher than
that of any other group?
(7 years old and above) were literate (that is, they
could at least write their names) compared to just
15 per cent of all girls and women. In the most recent
census of 2011, these figures have grown to 82 per
cent for boys and men, and 65 per cent for girls and
women. This means that the proportion of both men
and women who are now able to read and have at
least some amount of schooling has increased. But,
as you can also see, the percentage of the male
group is still higher than the female group. The gap
has not gone away.
Here is a table that shows the percentage of girls
and boys who leave schools from different social
groups including Scheduled Caste (SC) and
Scheduled Tribe (ST).
(in percentage)
You have probably noticed in the above table that
SC and ST girls leave school at a rate that is higher
than the category ¶All Girls·. This means that girls
who are from Dalit (SC) and Adivasi (ST) backgrounds
are less likely to remain in school. The 2011 census
also found that Muslim girls are less likely, than SC
and ST girls, to complete primary school. While a
Muslim girl is likely to stay in school for around
three years, girls from other communities spend
around four years in school.
There are several reasons why children from Dalit,
Adivasi and Muslim communities leave school. In
many parts of the country, especially in rural and
poor areas, there may not even be proper schools
nor teachers who teach on a regular basis. If a school
Average Annual Drop-out Rate in School Education (2014²15)


57
From the given table, convert the
figures of primary class children
who leave school into a bar
diagram. Two percentages have
already been converted for you in
the bar diagram on the left.
is not close to people·s homes, and there is no
transport like buses or vans, parents may not be
willing to send their girls to school. Many families
are too poor and unable to bear the cost of educating
all their children. Boys may get preference in this
situation. Many children also leave school because
they are discriminated against by their teacher and
classmates.
Women·s movement
Women and girls now have the right to study and go
to school. There are other spheres ² like legal reform,
violence and health ² where the situation of women
and girls has improved. These changes have not
happened automatically. Women individually, and
collectively have struggled to bring about these
changes. This struggle is known as the Women·s
Movement. Individual women and women·s
organisations from different parts of the country are
part of the movement. Many men support the women·s
movement as well. The diversity, passion and efforts
of those involved makes it a very vibrant movement.
Different strategies have been used to spread
awareness, fight discrimination and seek justice.
Here are some glimpses of this struggle.
Chapter 5: Women Change the World
Find out about the īBeti Bachao Beti PadhaoĬ
campaign launched in 2014.
Boys and girls
Percentage
2
4
6
8
10
0
All
boys
4.36%
ST
boys
7.02%


Campaigning
Campaigns to fight discrimination
and violence against women are an
important part of the women·s
movement. Campaigns have also led
to new laws being passed. A law was
made in 2006 to give women who face
physical and mental violence within
their homes, also called domestic
violence, some legal protection.
Similarly, efforts made by the
women·s movement led the Supreme
Court to formulate guidelines in 1997
to protect women against sexual
harassment at the workplace and
within educational institutions.
In the 1980s, for example, women·s
groups across the country spoke out
against ¶dowry deaths· ³ cases of
young brides being murdered by their
in-laws or husbands, greedy for more
dowry. Women·s groups spoke out
against the failure to bring these
cases to justice. They did so by
coming on to the streets, approaching
the courts, and by sharing
information. Eventually, this became
a public issue in the newspapers and
society, and the dowry laws were
changed to punish families who seek
dowry.
Satyarani, an active member of the womenĬs movement,
sitting on the steps of the Supreme Court surrounded by legal
files gathered during the course of a long legal battle to seek
justice for her daughter who was murdered for dowry.


Raising Awareness
An important part of the women·s
movements· work is to raise public
awareness on women·s rights issues.
Their message has been spread through
street plays, songs and public meetings.
Protesting
The women·s movement raises its voice when violations against women take place or
for example, when a law or policy acts against their interests. Public rallies and
demonstrations are a very powerful way of drawing attention to injustices.


60
Social and Political Life
Showing Solidarity
The women·s movement is also about showing
solidarity with other women and causes.
Above: Women are holding up
candles to demonstrate the
solidarity between the people of
India and Pakistan. Every year, on
14 August, several thousand people
gather at Wagah on the border of
India and Pakistan and hold a
cultural programme.
Below: On 8 March, International WomenĬs Day, women all over
the world come together to celebrate and renew their struggles.


61
1.
How do you think stereotypes, about what women can or
cannot do, affect women·s right to equality?
2.
List one reason why learning the alphabet was so
important to women like Rashsundari Devi, Ramabai and
Rokeya.
3.
´Poor girls drop out of school because they are not interested
in getting an education.µ Re-read the last paragraph on page
62 and explain why this statement is not true.
4.
Can you describe two methods of struggle that the
women·s movement used to raise issues? If you had to
organise a struggle against stereotypes, about what
women can or cannot do, what method would you employ
from the ones that you have read about? Why would you
choose this particular method?
EXERCISES
Glossary
Stereotype: When we believe that people belonging to particular groups based on religion, wealth,
language are bound to have certain fixed characteristics or can only do a certain type of work, we
create a stereotype. For example, in this chapter, we saw how boys and girls are made to take
certain subjects not because he or she has an aptitude for it, but because they are either boys or
girls. Stereotypes prevent us from looking at people as unique individuals.
Discrimination: When we do not treat people equally or with respect we are indulging in
discrimination. It happens when people or organisations act on their prejudices. Discrimination
usually takes place when we treat some one differently or make a distinction.
Violation: When someone forcefully breaks the law or a rule or openly shows disrespect, we can
say that he or she has committed a violation.
Sexual harassment: This refers to physical or verbal behaviour that is of a sexual nature and
against the wishes of a woman.
Chapter 5: Women Change the World


UNIT
FOUR


Media
Teacher·s note
Today, the media and advertising are a
pervasive presence in the lives of young
people, who may or may not have taken
the opportunity to seriously reflect upon
this fact. This Unit offers some ways by
which we can begin to think about these.
The focus is on explaining the strong
links between media and technology and
media and big business.  It explains how
the media ¶sets the agenda· through
influencing our perception of issues
worth devoting time and attention to,
and issues that are neglected or
overridden.
Chapter 6 foregrounds the widespread
effects of the media, and attempts to
connect the issues under discussion to the
learner·s own lives.  At the end of the
chapter, we expect the learner to recognise
the role of big business in the media
coverage of events ³ the way ¶news· is
selected for coverage, and the explicit/
implicit dimensions of that coverage. We
use two fictitious news reports to
demonstrate that there is seldom just one
version of a story or an event.  Building on
this, we expect the learner to develop the
skills required to critically analyse a
newspaper report or a TV story through
scrutinising the information provided, as
well as understanding the logic behind the
exclusion of certain perspectives.
These ideas can be strengthened by
selecting 
examples 
from 
actual
advertisements and structuring similar
questions around them.
This chapter concludes by linking its
contents to the idea of democracy.  It
emphasises, through using examples of
local media as well as social advertising,
how mainstream media and advertising
tend to favour those who have greater
financial as well as social resources. This
point can be reinforced in the classroom
by using local examples of media stories,
as well as posing questions about the ways
in which advertising is changing what is
locally available as well as locally valued.
63


