2
UNIT
ONE


3
Equality in Indian Democracy
Teacher·s note
This Unit introduces the learner to the
critical role of equality in democracy, with
specific reference to India. The Constitution
of India guarantees equality to all citizens.
Despite this, the daily lives of people in
India are far from equal. Earlier
discussions on equality in Civics textbooks
most often reiterated certain provisions of
the Constitution without adequately
considering the reality of these in people·s
lives. This Unit adopts a different approach.
It discusses the need for equality through
highlighting the inequalities that continue
to be practised and experienced by various
communities.
The government·s role in passing laws and
instituting policies is discussed to show that
commitment to the alleviation of existing
inequalities is a major part of the work that
governments undertake. The chapter also
briefly introduces an issue of inequality in
the United States of America to highlight
that this is a global phenomenon and a
feature of many democratic countries.
This chapter aims to help the learner
understand that equality and democracy
are dynamic and not static concepts. This
dynamism is reflected in the government·s
passing of new laws and programmes, and
in people·s movements around various
social and economic issues.
Local situations should be used as a
practical reference to make the discussion
on underlying concepts more relevant and
appropriate. A discussion on equality in the
classroom requires empathy as well as a
firm commitment on the teacher·s part to
ensuring that the dignity of all learners be
respected.
3


4
Social and Political Life
CHAPTER
On Equality
Equality in Indian democracy
The Indian Constitution recognises every person as
equal. This means that every individual in the
country, including male and female persons from
all castes, religions, tribes, educational and economic
backgrounds are recognised as equal. This is not to
say that inequality ceases to exist. It doesn·t. But
atleast, in democratic India, the principle of the
equality of all persons is recognised. While earlier
no law existed to protect people from discrimination
and ill-treatment, now there are several that work to
see that people are treated with dignity and as equals.
This recognition of equality includes some of the
following provisions in the Constitution: first that
every person is equal before the law. What this means
is that every person, from the President of the country
to Kanta, a domestic worker, has to obey the same
laws. Second, no person can be discriminated against
on the basis of their religion, race, caste, place of
birth or whether they are female or male. Third, every
person has access to all public places including
playgrounds, hotels, shops and markets. All persons
can use publicly available wells, roads and bathing
ghats. Fourth, untouchability has been abolished.
Can you think of an incident in
your life in which your dignity was
violated? How did this make you
feel?
In the 1975 film, Deewar, a boy who
works as a shoeshine refuses to pick up a
coin thrown at him. He feels that there
is dignity in the work that he does and
insists that his fee be given respectfully.




6
Social and Political Life
children would often go home for lunch and then not
return to school but now with the midday meal being
provided in school, their attendance has improved.
Their mothers, who earlier had to interrupt their work
to feed their children at home during the day, now
no longer need to do so. This programme has also
helped reduce caste prejudices because  children of
all castes in the school eat this meal together, and in
quite a few places, Dalit women have been employed
to cook the meal. The midday meal programme also
helps reduce the hunger of poor students who often
come to school and cannot concentrate because their
stomachs are empty.
While government programmes play an important
role in increasing equality of opportunity, there is much
that still needs to be done. While the midday meal
programme has helped increase the enrolment and
attendance of poor children in school, there continues
to be big differences in our country between schools
that the rich attend and those that the poor attend.
Even today there are several schools in the country in
which Dalit children are discriminated against and
treated unequally. These children are forced into
unequal situations in which their dignity is not
respected. This is because people refuse to think of
them as equal even though the law requires it.
One of the main reasons for this is that attitudes
change very slowly. Even though persons are aware
that discrimination is against the law, they continue
to treat people unequally on the basis of their caste,
religion, disability, economic status and because they
are women. It is only when people begin to believe
that no one is inferior, and that every person deserves
to be treated with dignity, that present attitudes can
change. Establishing equality in a democratic society
is a continuous struggle and one in which individuals
as well as various communities in India contribute to
and you will read more about this in this book.
Issues of equality in other democracies
You are probably wondering whether India is the only
democratic country in which there is inequality and
Children being served their midday
meal at a government school in
Uttarakhand.
What is the midday meal
programme? Can you list three
benefits of the programme? How
do you think this programme
might help promote greater
equality?
Find out about one government
scheme in your area. What does
this scheme do? Whom is this
scheme set up to benefit?


7
where the struggle for equality continues to exist.
The truth is that in many democratic countries
around the world, the issue of equality continues to
be the key issue around which communities struggle.
So, for example, in the United States of America, the
African²Americans whose ancestors were the slaves
who were brought over from Africa, continue to
describe their lives today as largely unequal. This,
despite the fact that there was a movement in the
late 1950s to push for equal rights for African²
Americans. Prior to this, African²Americans were
treated extremely unequally in the United States and
denied equality through law. For example, when
travelling by bus, they either had to sit at the back of
the bus or get up from their seat whenever a white
person wished to sit.
Rosa Parks (1913²2005) was an African²American
woman. Tired from a long day at work she refused to give
up her seat on a bus to a white man on 1 December 1955.
Her refusal that day started a huge agitation against
the unequal ways in which African²Americans were
treated and which came to be known as the Civil
Rights Movement. The Civil Rights Act of 1964
prohibited discrimination on the basis of race,
religion or national origin. It also stated that all
schools would be open to African²American children
and that they would no longer have to attend
ĮIt is disgraceful to live at the cost of
one's self-respect. Self-respect is the most
vital factor in life. Without it, man is a
cipher. To live worthily with self-
respect, one has to overcome difficulties.
It is out of hard and ceaseless struggle
alone that one derives strength,
confidence and recognition.
ĮMan is mortal. Everyone has to die
some day or the other. But one must
resolve to lay down one's life in
enriching the noble ideals of self-respect
and in bettering one's human life...
Nothing is more disgraceful for a brave
man than to live life devoid of self-
respect.į
ĩ B.R. Ambedkar
Chapter 1: On Equality
Rosa Parks, an Africanĩ
American woman, changed
the course of American
history with one defiant act.


8
Social and Political Life
separate schools specially set up for them. However,
despite this, a majority of African²Americans
continue to be among the poorest in the country.
Most African-American children can only afford to
attend government schools that have fewer facilities
and poorly qualified teachers as compared to white
students who either go to private schools or live in
areas where the government schools are as highly
rated as private schools.
Challenge of democracy
No country can be described as being completely
democratic. There are always communities and
individuals trying to expand the idea of democracy
and push for a greater recognition of equality on
existing as well as new issues. Central to this is the
struggle for the recognition of all persons as equal
and for their dignity to be maintained. In this book
you will read about how this issue of equality affects
various aspects of our daily lives in democratic India.
As you read these chapters, think about whether
the equality of all persons and their being able to
maintain their dignity is upheld.
Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.
(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race,
caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of
them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to ²
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment;
or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort maintained
wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public.
Excerpt from Article 15 of the Indian Constitution


9
EXERCISES
1.
In a democracy why is universal adult franchise important?
2.
Re-read the box on Article 15 and state two ways in which
this Article addresses inequality?
3.
 What do you understand by the term ´all persons are equal
before the lawµ? Why do you think it is important in a
democracy?
4.
According to the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act,
2016, persons with disabilities have equal rights, and that
the government should make possible their full
participation in society. The government has to provide
free education and integrate children with disabilities into
mainstream schools. This law also states that all public
places including buildings, schools, etc., should be
accessible and provided with ramps.
Look at the photograph and think about the boy who is being
carried down the stairs. Do you think the above law is being
implemented in his case? What needs to be done to make the
building more accessible for him? How would his being carried
down the stairs affect his dignity as well as his safety?
Glossary
Universal adult franchise:  This is a very important aspect of democratic societies. It means that all
adult (those who are 18 and above) citizens have the right to vote irrespective of their social or
economic backgrounds.
Dignity: This refers to thinking of oneself and other persons as worthy of respect.
Constitution:  This is a document that lays down the basic rules and regulations for people and
the government in the country to follow.
Civil Rights Movement: A movement that began in USA in 1950s in which African²American
people demanded equal rights and an end to racial discrimination.
http://disabilityaffairs.gov.in
Chapter 1: On Equality


