Social and Political Life
18
Chapter 2
Imagine yourself as a Hindu or Muslim living in a part
of the United States of America where Christian
fundamentalism is very powerful. Suppose that despite
being a US citizen, no one is willing to rent their house
to you. How would this make you feel? Would it not
make you feel resentful? What if you decided to
complain against this discrimination and were told to
go back to India. Would this not make you feel angry?
Your anger could take two forms. First, you might react
by saying that Christians should get the same treatment
in places where Hindus and Muslims are in a majority.
This is a form of retaliation. Or, you might take the
view that there should be justice for all. You may fight,
stating that no one should be discriminated against
on grounds of their religious practices and beliefs. This
statement rests on the assumption that all forms of
domination related to religion should end. This is the
essence of secularism. In this chapter, you will read
more about what this means in the Indian context.
Understanding Secularism
2024-25


19
Understanding Secularism
History provides us with many examples of discrimination,
exclusion and persecution on the grounds of religion. You
may have read about how Jews were persecuted in Hitler’s
Germany and how several millions were killed. Now, however,
the Jewish State of Israel treats its own Muslim and Christian
minorities quite badly. In Saudi Arabia, non-Muslims are not
allowed to build a temple, church etc., and nor can they gather
in a public place for prayers.
In all of the above examples, members of one religious
community either persecute or discriminate against
members of other religious communities. These acts of
discrimination take place more easily when one religion is
given official recognition by the State at the expense of other
religions. Clearly no one would wish to be discriminated against,
because of their religion nor dominated by another religion.
In India, can the State discriminate against citizens on the
grounds of their religion?
What is Secularism?
In the previous chapter, you read about how the Indian
Constitution contains Fundamental Rights that protect us
against State power as well as against the tyranny of the
majority. The Indian Constitution allows individuals the
freedom to live by their religious beliefs and practices as
they interpret these. In keeping with this idea of religious
freedom for all, India also adopted a strategy of separating
the power of religion and the power of the State. Secularism
refers to this separation of religion from the State.
Re-read the introduction to
this chapter. Why do you
think retaliation is not the
proper response to this
problem? What would
happen if different groups
followed this path?
The three drawings in this chapter were done
by students of your age. They were asked to
draw on religious tolerance.
Chapter 2: Understanding Secularism
Tanvi, Abhilasha and Snehal, VI B, Srijan School, Delhi.
2024-25


Social and Political Life
20
Discuss in class: Can there be
different views within the same
religion?
Why is it Important to Separate Religion
from the State?
As discussed above, the most important aspect of secularism
is its separation of religion from State power. This is
important for a country to function democratically. Almost
all countries of the world will have more than one religious
group living in them. Within these religious groups, there
will most likely be one group that is in a majority. If this
majority religious group has access to State power, then it
could quite easily use this power and financial resources to
discriminate against and persecute persons of other
religions. This tyranny of the majority could result in the
discrimination, coercion and at times even the killing of
religious minorities. The majority could quite easily
prevent minorities from practising their religions. Any
form of domination based on religion is in violation of the
rights that a democratic society guarantees to each and every
citizen irrespective of their religion. Therefore, the tyranny
of the majority and the violation of Fundamental Rights
that can result is one reason why it is important to separate
the State and religion in democratic societies.
Another reason that it is important to separate religion
from the State in democratic societies is because we also
need to protect the freedom of individuals to exit from
their religion, embrace another religion or have the freedom
to interpret religious teachings differently. To understand
this point better, let us take the practice of untouchability.
You might feel that you dislike this practice within
Hinduism and therefore, you want to try and reform it.
However, if State power were in the hands of those Hindus
who support untouchability, then do you think that you
would have an easy task to try and change this? Even if you
were part of the dominant religious group, you might face
a lot of resistance from fellow members of your
community. These members who have control of State
power might say that there is only one interpretation of
Hinduism and that you do not have the freedom to interpret
this differently.
Akshita Jain, V, Srijan School, Delhi.
2024-25


21
What is Indian Secularism?
The Indian Constitution mandates that the Indian State be
secular. According to the Constitution, only a secular State
can realise its objectives to ensure the following:
1. that one religious community does not dominate
another;
2. that some members do not dominate other members of
the same religious community;
3. that the State does not enforce any particular religion
nor take away the religious freedom of individuals.
The Indian State works in various ways to prevent the above
domination. First, it uses a strategy of distancing itself from
religion. The Indian State is not ruled by a religious group
and nor does it support any one religion. In India,
government spaces like law courts, police stations,
government schools and offices are not supposed to display
or promote any one religion.
Chapter 2: Understanding Secularism
Pinky, VI G, Sarvodaya Kanya Vidyalaya , Delhi.
2024-25


Social and Political Life
22
In the above storyboard, the celebration of the religious
festival within the school would have been a violation of
the government’s policy of treating all religions equally.
Government schools cannot promote any one religion
either in their morning prayers or through religious
celebrations. This rule does not apply to private schools.
In the above storyboard,
discuss the answer given
by the teacher.
In a government school in
Seemapur, students want to
celebrate a religious festival.
I never thought of it this
way. I guess we can always
celebrate it outside school.
Anyway we were
planning to celebrate it
in our locality.
Sir, there is a big religious
festival next month. We’ve
never celebrated it in school.
Can we do it this year?
I’m afraid that isn’t possible,
Rekha. This is a government
school. We cannot give
importance to any one religion.
Private schools may do that.
Government schools don’t
celebrate any religious
festivals in the school premises.
Most religious festivals are public
holidays so that we can
celebrate these at home.
2024-25


23
In the above storyboard, Paramjit, the Sikh youth, does not
have to wear a helmet. This is because the Indian State
recognises that wearing a pugri (turban) is central to a Sikh’s
religious practice and in order not to interfere with this,
allows an exception in the law.
The third way in which Indian secularism works to prevent
the domination listed earlier is through a strategy of
intervention. You read earlier in this chapter about
untouchability. This is a good example where members of
The second way in which Indian secularism works to
prevent the above domination is through a strategy of non-
interference. This means that in order to respect the
sentiments of all religions and not interfere with religious
practices, the State makes certain exceptions for particular
religious communities.
Government schools often have
students from different
religious backgrounds.
Re-read the three objectives of
a secular State and write two
sentences on why it is
important that government
schools do not promote any
one
one
one
one
one religion?
A group of friends who’ve recently bought scooters are
meeting to go for a ride together.
Hey Paramjit! Why
won’t you be fined?
For Sikhs, wearing
a pugri is a very
important part of
our religion. The
government cannot
force me to wear a
helmet.
Don’t worry, I will
not be fined.
Hey, I hope you have a helmet.
You know the law in Delhi requires
that you wear one. Why aren’t
you wearing a helmet?
Do you want to be fined?
Chapter 2: Understanding Secularism
2024-25


Social and Political Life
24
the same religion (‘upper-caste’ Hindus) dominate other
members (some ‘lower castes’) within it. In order to
prevent this religion-based exclusion and discrimination
of ‘lower castes’, the Indian Constitution bans
untouchability. In this instance, the State is intervening in
religion in order to end a social practice that it believes
discriminates and excludes, and that violates the
Fundamental Rights of ‘lower castes’ who are citizens of
this country. Similarly, to ensure that laws relating to equal
inheritance rights are respected, the State may have to
intervene in the religion-based ‘personal laws’ of
communities.
The intervention of the State can also be in the form of
support. The Indian Constitution grants the right to
religious communities to set up their own schools and
colleges. It also gives them financial aid on a non-
preferential basis.
In what way is Indian secularism different from that of
other democratic countries?
Some of the above objectives are similar to those that have
been included in the Constitutions of secular democratic
countries in other parts of the world. For example, the First
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution prohibits the
legislature from making laws “respecting an establishment
of religion” or that “prohibit the free exercise of religion”.
What is meant by the word ‘establishment’ is that the
legislature cannot declare any religion as the official
religion. Nor can they give preference to one religion. In
the U.S.A. the separation between State and religion means
that neither the State nor religion can interfere in the affairs
of one another.
There is one significant way in which Indian secularism
differs from the dominant understanding of secularism as
practised in the United States of America. This is because
unlike the strict separation between religion and the State
in American secularism, in Indian secularism the State can
intervene in religious affairs. You have read about how the
In the United States of America, most children
in government schools have to begin their
school day reciting the ‘Pledge of Allegiance’.
This Pledge includes the words “under God”. It
was established more than 60 years ago that
government school students are not required to
recite the Pledge if it conflicts with their
religious beliefs. Despite this, there have been
several legal challenges objecting to the phrase
“under God” saying that it violates the
separation between church and State that the
First Amendment of the US Constitution
guarantees.
The above photo shows students taking the
‘Pledge of Allegiance’ in a government school in
the U.S.A.
2024-25


25
Indian Constitution intervened in Hindu religious practices
in order to abolish untouchability. In Indian secularism,
though the State is not strictly separate from religion it
does maintain a principled distance vis-à-vis religion. This
means that any interference in religion by the State has to
be based on the ideals laid out in the Constitution. These
ideals serve as the standard through which we can judge
whether the State is or is not behaving according to secular
principles.
The Indian State is secular and works in various ways to
prevent religious domination. The Indian Constitution
guarantees Fundamental Rights that are based on these
secular principles. However, this is not to say that there is
no violation of these rights in Indian society. Indeed it is
precisely because such violations happen frequently that
we need a constitutional mechanism to prevent them from
happening. The knowledge that such rights exist makes us
sensitive to their violations and enables us to take action
when these violations take place.
Can you think of an example
from India where individuals
or communities of different
faiths came together to
promote social harmony and
celebrate constitutional
values?
In February 2004, France passed a law banning students from wearing any conspicuous
religious or political signs or symbols such as the Islamic headscarf, the Jewish skullcap, or
large Christian crosses. This law has encountered a lot of resistance from immigrants who are
mainly from the former French colonies of Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco. In the 1960s, France
had faced a shortage of workers and, therefore, had provided visas for these immigrants to come
and work in the country. The daughters of these immigrants often wear headscarves while
attending school.  However, with the passing of this new law, they have been expelled from
their school for wearing headscarves.
Chapter 2: Understanding Secularism
2024-25


Social and Political Life
26
1. List the different types of religious practice that you find in your neighbourhood. This could be
different forms of prayer, worship of different gods, sacred sites, different kinds of religious
music and singing etc. Does this indicate freedom of religious practice?
2. Will the government intervene if some religious group says that their religion allows them to
practise infanticide? Give reasons for your answer.
3. Complete the following table:
4. Look up the annual calendar of holidays of your school. How many of them pertain to different
religions? What does this indicate?
5. Find out some examples of different views within the same religion.
6. The Indian State both keeps away from religion as well as intervenes in religion. This idea can be
quite confusing. Discuss this once again in class using examples from the chapter as well as
those that you might have come up with.
Exercises
Objective
Why is this important?
Example of a violation of this
objective
One religious community
does not dominate another.
The State does not enforce
any particular religion nor
take away the religious
freedom of individuals.
That some members do not
dominate other members
of the same religious
community.
2024-25


27
GLOSSARY
Coercion: To force someone to do something. In the context of this chapter, it refers
to the force used by a legal authority like the State.
Freedom to interpret: The independence that all persons shall have to understand
things in their own way. In the context of this chapter, it refers to a person’s liberty
to develop their own understanding and meaning of the religion they practice.
Intervene: In the context of this chapter, it refers to the State’s efforts to influence
a particular matter in accordance with the principles of the Constitution.
7.  This poster alongside highlights the need for
‘Peace’. It says, “Peace is a never-ending
process....It cannot ignore our differences or
overlook our common interests.” Write in
your own words what you think the above
sentences are trying to convey? How does it
relate to the need for religious tolerance?
This chapter had three drawings on religious
tolerance made by students of your age.
Design your own poster on religious tolerance
for your peers.
Chapter 2: Understanding Secularism
2024-25


